0:02:52.1 SC: Jeremy Dittman says, I really enjoyed your episode with
Matt Strassler last month. At one point in your discussion, you asked
Matt for his definition of a field at its most fundamental level. And
he answered that it's something extended throughout the cosmos with
the feature that, if you change it in one place, it has effects in
other places in the future. This seems to place causal structure as
the rock bottom essence of what a field is. Do you agree with this
definition? Is causality fundamental in this sense, or something
better considered as emergent? Well, I think there's a couple things
going on here. One is, what do you mean by causality? And the other,
of course, is the explicit question, what do you mean by a field? You
know, I have frequently talked about cause and effect relationships in
the macroscopic world as something that is emergent, that is a higher
level thing.

0:03:38.8 SC: What I mean by that is that the fundamental laws of
physics, whether it's Newtonian mechanics or the Schrodinger equation
or quantum field theory or whatever, are Putting aside some very minor
questions about the quantum measurement problem, but the basic
dynamical equations of physics do not distinguish between past and
future. They are reversible. They are time reversal invariant, two
closely related concepts but not quite the same. Anyway, the point is
that if your fundamental dynamics are unchanged by switching past to
future, then you can't have any kind of idea that there are things
called causes which always come temporally before things called
effects, right? And yet that notion is super useful in our actual
world. And I think that it's pretty clear that that's because our
everyday notion of cause and effect arises from a universe with a
strong arrow of time at a higher level of macroscopic emergent
behavior. You know, the arrow of time, as we've often talked about, is
only macroscopic.

0:04:47.8 SC: It doesn't exist there at the microscopic level. It's
because of entropy increasing over time in a coarse-grained view of
the universe. And the same thing is true for cause-and-effect
relationships. The reason why I'm saying this is because that is not
what most particle physicists mean by causality. They have borrowed
the word causality to mean something other than cause-and-effect
relationships, which is fine, but it can be confusing when they use it
in front of other people. All particle physicists mean is things
travel slower than the speed of light or at the speed of light, right?
So you poke the universe in one place and at the fundamental level,
you could either have ripples of things happening moving toward the
future or ripples of things having happened coming into you from the
past. Equally well, you could solve the equations of motion both
ways. Those of you who are physics majors know that this is an
explicit thing. When you study electromagnetism, there's sort of
different kinds of solutions to the equations with past and future
boundary conditions, etc.

0:05:56.1 SC: So to move on to what Matt was really talking about
vis-a-vis the field concept, I would not put causality up there, even
in this sense, when I really talk about what a field is. But, you
know, it's perfectly okay for him to do so. I think the point was that
in that discussion, he was less interested in the very broadest idea
of what a field might be and more interested in the actual definition
of a field as we use it in real-world quantum field theory in the
standard model of particle physics. So it's not that the causal
structure of the world and the light cones and the inability to go
faster than the speed of light is necessarily part of the definition
of a field. It's that since we have those things in the real world,
those things play a really important role in how fields actually
behave in the world. For example, for a counterexample in some sense,
my favorite example of the first time when the field concept really
came into physics was with Pierre-Simon Laplace, one of our favorite
people here at Mindscape, one of our favorite mathematical physical
thinkers.

0:07:05.8 SC: Among other things that Laplace did besides his
demonology and so forth, he was the one who showed how you could take
Newtonian gravity, right, the famous inverse square law of gravity and
think about it in terms of a field theory. The field in that case is
the gravitational potential field. There is an equation, Laplace's
equation it is called, for how the field responds to mass and energy,
if you want, in the universe. And it is precisely mathematically
equivalent to good old Newtonian gravity. It is slightly more
convenient for some purposes because you don't need to think of
individual parts of the gravitational sources as points with masses,
you can have a distributed source, you can have energy density spread
out throughout the universe. But really, it's just a matter of
convenience. The two formalisms are precisely equivalent. The reason
why I'm mentioning this is because Laplace's gravitational potential
field version of Newtonian gravity is Newtonian. It is not
relativistic. There are no light cones. There is no speed at which
influences propagate across the universe. But it is a field theory.

0:08:19.5 SC: It's just a field theory where if I move a mass right
here, that instantly changes the value of the field all throughout the
universe. There is no upper limit on the propagation speed. But that's
not the real world either. So it just matters. It's just a matter of
whether or not you are taking the actual features of the real world as
really important when you define what this concept means to you. Ned
Grady says, your catchphrase, sorry about that, has creeped its way
into my speech. I hope you're happy. Where did you pick it up? I
honestly can say that I've never realized that that was a
catchphrase. Sorry about that. Yeah. But probably it is. One doesn't
recognize very often one's own frequent phrases. It's really not a
catchphrase. I don't think anyone would recognize it. But it could be
something that I lean on quite often. I have zero idea where I picked
that up. But, you know, maybe it's just guilt talking. You know, maybe
it's just I want to keep the audience happy.

0:09:25.0 SC: Sometimes I can't do it. I have to apologize every so
often. So I'm gonna claim to have made that up all by myself. Navid
Alam says, what intimidates you? Is there a person that might give you
pause on a chance meeting and with whom you would very much want to
but struggle to make conversation? Well. I don't think there's a
person like that, no. There would have been when I was younger, but I
think I've grown past that because I've been able to live a life that
is, you know, sufficiently fortunate that I've met a lot of incredibly
impressive, intimidating people. And certainly, believe me, I've been
intimidated many, many times. But at some point, you meet people who
are super duper good at their job, super duper talented, super duper
smart, or whatever, accomplished. And they're just people at the end
of the day. I've heard very smart people say and do very dumb things,
say and do silly things and very warm and human things, etc. There's
really no reason to be intimidated by human beings. I do think that,
again, people are super impressive. That's a different thing.

0:10:37.2 SC: I just think that, you know, I heard recently a piano
recital by Michael Hirsch who is a Professor, among other things, he's
a composer and performer, mostly a composer. He's at Johns
Hopkins. He's at the Peabody School, which is part of Johns
Hopkins. And it's, his ability to play the piano is just superhuman,
and the things that he composes, he said afterward, you know, that
people were asking him, and he said, I don't think anyone else can
play these pieces, basically. I've heard people try, and it's not
quite the same. He has a really extraordinary ability to play the
piano, and that's endlessly impressive to me. I'm not intimidated by
him, personally. He seemed like a nice guy, honestly. But There are
certain many, many dimensions of human accomplishment at which people
are far, far surpassing anything I could ever imagine. But I think
that my attitude toward those people is one of admiration and being
impressed, but not really one of being intimidated.

0:11:40.6 SC: Supendu Harsh says, hypothetically, if one of your
colleagues, a brilliant human being and an even better theoretical
physicist, leaves a note saying, all the evidence points to a single
conclusion. Physics has never existed and will never exist. I know
what I'm doing is irresponsible, but I have no choice. And then they
disappear. What would you do? This is an excerpt from one of my
favorite science fiction novels, The Three-Body Problem, which is
being made as a Netflix series. I think that it would depend a lot on
details about this person, etc. But I think that the chances that I
would take such a note at face value as truth are very, very small
indeed. In the space of all possible ways that such a note could come
to exist, many more plausible ones involving that one brilliant
theoretical physicist being wrong or having a breakdown of some
sort. There's many more plausible versions of that story than there
are of physics not existing. So not to say that there aren't events
that would cause me to believe that kind of dramatic claim, but the
evidence would have to be enormously stronger than that.

0:12:54.5 SC: That's all I will say about that. Jeffrey Segal says, I
was struck by the sequence of your conversation with Sahar Haidari
Fard with the possibility that social media might provide a universal
coupling constant coordinating spins in an Ising transition model. And
then also your solo episode discussing Jeffrey West and the idea that
communication between people has been driving innovation. Was placing
these two episodes one after another purely coincidental or did your
conversation with Sahar inspire you to do that solo episode? It was
mostly coincidental, I think. The thing that really inspired me to do
it was listening to Jeffrey's talk that he gave as the lecturer here
at Johns Hopkins. But let me be very honest. I think that people
sometimes exaggerate the extent to which you can pinpoint knowledge in
your brain or even ideas in your mind as originating from some
particular source, okay? In other words, people say, well, when did
you first think of this?

0:14:04.4 SC: Or what caused you to have this idea, right? And almost
always, I think, in the real world, for the vast majority of thoughts
that I have, I don't know is the answer. Because many, many things
happen. I mean, I do the podcast every week and that's only a small
fraction of all the things I do and the people I talk to every week,
right? So many things are going on in my mind, including many things
I'm reading and books I'm planning to write and have read myself and
so forth, and things develop slowly and gradually, and there's little
shifts of emphases and reshuffling of cards that are already there and
so forth. You know, the stuff that I talked with Sahar about, is stuff
that I've thought about in different ways for a long time. I mean,
even here on the podcast, when we talk with Caelan O'Connor, for
example, we talked about similar things. I had a whole course that I
taught to Johns Hopkins on the physics of democracy, which will
someday become a book and so on. So there's no question that talking
to her absolutely gave me good ideas and helped me think about things,
but I can't relate exactly the words in that conversation to exactly
what I talked about in the podcast episode.

0:15:12.5 SC: So I just think I'm not giving you the actual answer to
your question, but I think that it's a mistake to try to be too... To
try to relate things that you read too directly with things that you
think, because so many things that you think are being caused by
subconscious things or ways of mixing pre-existing ideas that you're
not even aware of at the surface. J
